Explain how to manage SigNoz Alert using Terraform (#1031)
SigNoz/signoz.io: data/docs/alerts-management/terraform-provider-signoz.mdx

  required_version = ">= 0.13"
}
```

### Step 2: Install Terraform signoz Provider

Add specification block for the signoz provider as follows:
```diff
terraform {
  required_version = ">= 0.13"

+ required_providers {
+   signoz = {
+     source = "Signoz/signoz"
+     version = "~>0.0.4"
+   }
+ }
}
```

Running `terraform init` will create `.terraform.lock.hcl` file, which locks the provider version for consistent usage.

### Step 3: Configure signoz Provider

Add `provider {}` block to the `.tf` file as follows:
```hcl
provider "signoz" {}
```

By setting the environmental variables below, the signoz provider will automatically read these variables and authorize with your SigNoz Cloud account:
``` bash
SIGNOZ_ACCESS_TOKEN="your-access-token"
SIGNOZ_ENDPOINT="https://your-signoz-endpoint"
```

You can explicitly set these variables in the `provider {}` block as shown below, but avoid hardcoding your access token if you plan to commit your `.tf` files to an online version control system.
```hcl
provider "signoz" {
  endpoint="https://your-signoz-endpoint"
  access_token="your-access-token"  # Do not type your token directly if you push codes online
}
```
## Create new alert

> ### Step 4: Define SigNoz Alert as Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1: Define SigNoz Alert as Code
```

            "stepInterval" : 60,
            "timeAggregation" : "avg"
          }
        },
        "chQueries" : {
          "A" : {
            "disabled" : false,
            "query" : ""
          }
        },
        "panelType" : "graph",
        "promQueries" : {
          "A" : {
            "disabled" : false,
            "query" : ""
          }
        },
        "queryType" : "builder",
        "unit" : "bytes"
      },
      "matchType" : "1",
      "op" : "1",
      "selectedQueryName" : "A",
      "target" : 10,
      "targetUnit" : "gbytes"
    }
  )
  severity           = "info"
  broadcast_to_all   = false
  preferred_channels = []
  rule_type          = "threshold_rule"
  description        = "An example alert created by Terraform"
  eval_window        = "5m0s"
  frequency          = "1m0s"
  labels = {
    "environment" = "test"
  }
}
   ```
This configuration defines:
- condition: Trigger alerts if `k8s_node_memory_rss` is missing for 10 seconds.
- metric: Aggregates the average value of the `k8s_node_memory_rss` metric grouped by Kubernetes node name.
- interval: Evaluates the metric every 1 minutes with 5-minutes evaluation window.

> ### Step 5: Check Correctness of Definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Check Correctness of Definition
```

After defining your alert, validate its syntax by running `validate` command:
```bash
terraform validate
```
If the resource is defined correctly, you will see the message: `Success! The configuration is valid.`

In case you get any error, fix your definition by referencing the console output:

![Validate error](../../../public/img/blog/common/terraform_provider_validate_error.webp)

The error indicates that:
- the required argument alert_type` was not found.
- an unexpected argument `alert_typ was passed.

Fix the typo that caused this error:
```diff
 resource "signoz_alert" "example" {
   alert      = "Example alert"
-  alert_typ = "METRIC_BASED_ALERT"
+  alert_type = "METRIC_BASED_ALERT"
   condition = jsonencode(
     {
       "absentFor" : 10,
```

> ### Step 6: Provision SigNoz Alert to SigNoz Cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 3: Provision SigNoz Alert to SigNoz Cloud
```

When you're ready, `plan` your Terraform module to see diffs between your code and resources on the remote (SigNoz Cloud):

> ![Plan](../../../public/img/blog/common/alerts_terraform_provider_plan.webp)

Reviewer: Please put all the images in this folder rather than the blog folder - https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz-web/tree/main/public/img/docs/alerts

Reviewer 2: fixed: 01280eb5

---
date: 2024-12-05
id: terraform-provider-signoz
title: Terraform Provider
---
# Creating SigNoz Alert using Terraform 

The configuration of alerts for a monitoring target is the very definition of what the team perceives as a “problem” and should be managed as properly as the application code.
By defining SigNoz alerts as Terraform code, it is possible to manage changes to the alert settings.

## Overview

SigNoz alert notifies you of the change in the state of your service.

> Although getting alerts that work wisely often requires complex configuration, Terraform 'signoz' provider will help you manage SigNoz alerts as reviewable codes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although setting smart, effective alerts can be achieved using [SigNoz UI](https://signoz.io/docs/userguide/alerts-management/), **Terraform 'signoz' provider** will help you manage SigNoz alerts as reviewable codes.
```

This document will show you how to:
- configure the provider
- create a new alert on SigNoz Cloud
- start managing preexistent alerts using Terraform

## Prerequisites

- Terraform
  - version of Terraform runtime: [v0.13.0](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform/releases/tag/v0.13.0) or later
  - version of signoz provider: [0.0.4](https://github.com/SigNoz/terraform-provider-signoz/releases/tag/v0.0.4) or later
- SigNoz Cloud
  - endpoint URL
  - access token

> ## Create SigNoz Alert using Terraform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure Terraform Provider
```

Steps 1, 2 and 3 would be better under this heading.

### Step 1: Configure Terraform environment

Create `.tf` file with an arbitrary name (`main.tf` is commonly used) and add the following content:
```hcl
terraform {
  required_version = ">= 0.13"
}
```

> ### Step 2: Install Terraform sinoz Provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Install Terraform signoz Provider
```

> Add specification block for the signoz provider as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add specification block for the SigNoz provider as follows:
```

Reviewer 2: As for the o11y backend product name, of course it should be "SigNoz",
but as a Terraform provider, "signoz" would be appropriate, wouldn't it? @Calm-Rock

Reviewer 2: If no, then other locations pointing to the provider name may also need to be modified to "SigNoz".

Reviewer: Makes sense. Let's keep it the way it is.

```diff
terraform {
  required_version = ">= 0.13"

+ required_providers {
+   signoz = {
+     source = "Signoz/signoz"
+     version ~> "0.0.4"
+   }
+ }
}
```

> Running `terraform init` will create `.terraform.lock.hcl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running `terraform init` will create `.terraform.lock.hcl` file, which locks the provider version for consistent usage.
```

> ### Step 3: Configure sinoz Provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 3: Configure signoz Provider
```

Add `provider {}` block to the `.tf` file as follows:
```hcl
provider "signoz" {}
```

By setting the environmental variables below, the signoz provider will automatically read these variables and authorize with your SigNoz Cloud account:
``` bash
SIGNOZ_ACCESS_TOKEN="your-access-token"

> SIGNOZ_ENDPOINT="http://your-signoz-endpoint:3301"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SIGNOZ_ENDPOINT="http://your-signoz-endpoint"
```

> SIGNOZ_ENDPOINT="http://your-signoz-endpoint:3301"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SIGNOZ_ENDPOINT="https://your-signoz-endpoint:3301"
```

Reviewer 2: thanks!
applied: e5f0888c

> ```

Reviewer: SigNoz Endpoint would look something like: `https://xyz.us.signoz.cloud`.

Reviewer 2: thank you!
corrected: e5f0888c

> Although you can explicitly set these variables in `provider {}` as below, do not type your access token directly if you're going to push your `.tf` files to the online version control system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can explicitly set these variables in the `provider {}` block as shown below, but avoid hardcoding your access token if you plan to commit your `.tf` files to an online version control system.
```

```hcl
provider "signoz" {

>   endpoint="http://your-signoz-endpoint:3301"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  endpoint="https://your-signoz-endpoint"
```

  access_token="your-access-token"  # Do not type your token directly if you push codes online
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create new alert
```
Steps 4, 5 and 6 should be under this heading as 

Step 1: Define SigNoz Alert as Code

Step 2: Check Coeerectness of Definition

Step 3: Provision SigNoz Alert to SigNoz Cloud

                "isJSON" : false,
                "key" : "k8s_node_name",
                "type" : "tag"
              }
            ],
            "limit" : 0,
            "offset" : 0,
            "pageSize" : 0,
            "queryName" : "A",
            "reduceTo" : "avg",
            "spaceAggregation" : "avg",
            "stepInterval" : 60,
            "timeAggregation" : "avg"
          }
        },
        "chQueries" : {
          "A" : {
            "disabled" : false,
            "query" : ""
          }
        },
        "panelType" : "graph",
        "promQueries" : {
          "A" : {
            "disabled" : false,
            "query" : ""
          }
        },
        "queryType" : "builder",
        "unit" : "bytes"
      },
      "matchType" : "1",
      "op" : "1",
      "selectedQueryName" : "A",
      "target" : 10,
      "targetUnit" : "gbytes"
    }
  )
  severity           = "info"
  broadcast_to_all   = false
  preferred_channels = []
  rule_type          = "threshold_rule"
  description        = "An example alert created by Terraform"
  eval_window        = "5m0s"
  frequency          = "1m0s"
  labels = {
    "environment" = "test"
  }
}

>    ```

Reviewer: Add a brief description of what the above alert does.

Reviewer 2: fixed: e5f0888c

> Refer to the [provider's documentation](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/SigNoz/signoz/latest/docs/resources/alert) for the latest information because the API schema of the provider may be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [provider's documentation](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/SigNoz/signoz/latest/docs/resources/alert) for the latest information about the API schema.
```

### Step 5: Check Correctness of Definition

After defining your alert, validate its syntax by running `validate` command:
```bash

> $ terraform validate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terraform validate
```
This should be copy pastable by the user.

> Success! The configuration is valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

The output should not be a part of the code block which the user can copy and paste.

```

> You'll get a success message if the resource is defined properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the resource is defined correctly, you will see the message: `Success! The configuration is valid.`
```

In case you get any error, fix your definition by referencing the console output:

> ```bash

Reviewer: We should have screenshots of these errors on the console, rather than a code block. 

We should ideally use code blocks only when we want the user to be able to copy and use the code somewhere.

Reviewer 2: I was impressed by this suggestion. 
Yes, you're right...I've always written console output as code blocks, but from this time I'll use image for this purpose.

fixed: 441d1548

$ terraform validate
terraform validate
╷
│ Error: Missing required argument
│
│   on main.tf line 14, in resource "signoz_alert" "example":
│   14: resource "signoz_alert" "example" {
│
│ The argument "alert_type" is required, but no definition was found.
╵
╷
│ Error: Unsupported argument
│
│   on main.tf line 16, in resource "signoz_alert" "example":
│   16:   alert_typ = "METRIC_BASED_ALERT"
│
│ An argument named "alert_typ" is not expected here. Did you mean "alert_type"?

> ```

Reviewer: Give a brief explanation about the example of errors shown above and how to resolve them.

Reviewer 2: fixed: 87acf88d

### Step 6: Provision SigNoz Alert to SigNoz Cloud

When you're ready, `plan` your Terraform module to see diffs between your code and resources on the remote (SigNoz Cloud):
```bash

> $ terraform plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terraform plan
```

Since this is a run command that the user can copy paste.

> Terraform used the selected providers to generate the following execution plan. Resource actions are indicated with the following symbols:

Reviewer: As mentioned before, we should use images for the output. So please replace this output code block with images.

Reviewer 2: fixed: https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz-web/commit/441d1548c16a610a03cb3c642f6573534f14b8c8

  + create

Terraform will perform the following actions:

  # signoz_alert.example alert will be created
  + resource "signoz_alert" "example" {
      + alert              = "Example alert"
      + alert_type         = "METRIC_BASED_ALERT"
      + broadcast_to_all   = false
      + condition          = jsonencode(

---- snip ----

      + version            = "v4"
    }

Plan: 1 to add, 0 to change, 0 to destroy.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Note: You didn't use the -out option to save this plan, so Terraform can't guarantee to take exactly these actions if you run "terraform apply" now.
```

> The output from the example code above says you're going to create an alert named "Example alert" on the remote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output indicates that it plans to create a new resource(`signoz_alert`)  with specified attributes like `alert`, `alert_type`, and `version`. The plan shows **1 resource to add**, with no changes or deletions.
```

Once you're satisfied that the diffs are as intended, `apply` your code for provisioning:
``` bash

> $ terraform apply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terraform apply
```

> Terraform used the selected providers to generate the following execution plan. Resource actions are indicated with the following symbols:

Reviewer: Please provide a screenshot instead of the code block for the output.

Reviewer 2: fixed: https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz-web/commit/441d1548c16a610a03cb3c642f6573534f14b8c8

  + create

Terraform will perform the following actions:

  # signoz_alert.example will be created
  + resource "signoz_alert" "example" {
      + alert              = "Example alert"
      + alert_type         = "METRIC_BASED_ALERT"
      + broadcast_to_all   = false
      + condition          = jsonencode(

---- snip ----

      + version            = "v4"
    }

Plan: 1 to add, 0 to change, 0 to destroy.

Do you want to perform these actions?
  Terraform will perform the actions described above.
  Only 'yes' will be accepted to approve.

  Enter a value:
```
Terraform will wait for your confirmation before applying the change to the remote.

Review the diffs on the console again and type `yes` to confirm:
``` bash

>   Enter a value: yes

Reviewer: Please provide a screenshot instead of the code block for the output.

Reviewer 2: fixed: https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz-web/commit/441d1548c16a610a03cb3c642f6573534f14b8c8

signoz_alert.example: Creating...
signoz_alert.example: Creation complete after 1s [id=17]

Apply complete! Resources: 1 added, 0 changed, 0 destroyed.
```

After getting the success message on the console, you'll find the alert provisioned on the remote:

> ![Screenshot 2024-10-24 at 4.06.37](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/SJmGS0vg1g.png)

Reviewer: Please upload this image in [this folder](https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz-web/tree/main/public/img/docs/alerts) and render from there.
It should be in `.webp` format as mentioned in the shared guidelines.

Reviewer 2: fixed: 3edf8c4d

## Manage Preexistent Alert as Terraform Resource

> In Terraform v1.5.0 and later, you can use an `import {}` block to import a preexistent SigNoz alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In **Terraform v1.5.0 and later**, you can use an `import {}` block to import a preexistent SigNoz alert.
```

Define the target alert as a Terraform resource as explained in the previous section, and relate it to the resource on remote.

Specify the id of the target alert to the `id` field:
```hcl
import {
  to = signoz_alert.example
  id = "123"
}
```

> Of course, you can do the same by the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can do the same by the command:
```

``` bash

> $ terraform import signoz_alert.example 123

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terraform import signoz_alert.example 123
```

```

## Conclusion

> Using Terraform, you can manage both new- and preexistent- SigNoz alert as code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Terraform, you can manage both new and pre-existent SigNoz alert as code.
```
